This article is a review of a state-of-the-art 3D instance segmentation paper called SGPN. Link to the original paper here by Weiyue Wang, Ronald Yu, Qiangui Huang and Ulrich Neumann.

The basic structure of this article is as follows:

– Introduction
– Model Architecture
– Results
– Conclusion

What is 3D Instance Segmentation?
Instance segmentation in the 3D space is a challenging computer vision task that requires the detection of separate instances of every class from a 3D point cloud. For each point, we need to output semantic class +instance ID. For example, from a scan of a room, detect chair 1, chair 2, desk 1, desk 2, etc.

Motivation behind SGPN
The literature for 3D instance segmentation and object detection lags far behind its 2D counterpart
Using CNNs on 3D volumetric data is limited by high memory and computational cost
Able to leverage recent research: Deep learning frameworks such as PointNet and PointNet++ on point clouds open up more efficient and flexible ways to handle 3D data
Various applications in autonomous driving and robotics
Main Contribution of the paper
Novel Representation of 3D instance segmentation in the form of a Similarity Matrix.

In their method, they regress the likelihood of two points belonging to the same group and formulates the similarity matrix as group proposals to handle a variable number of instances.

They believe that a similarity matrix is a more natural and straightforward representation for 3D instance segmentation on a point cloud compared to traditional 2D instance segmentation representations, which involve segmenting a binary mask of the object.

Model Architecture
Press enter or click to view image in full size

The pipeline of the system for point cloud instance segmentation
The great thing about SGPN is that it is a very simple and intuitive framework. As shown in the image above, it first passes a point cloud P of size Np through a feed-forward feature extraction network inspired by PointNets, learning both global and local features in the point cloud. This feature extraction network produces a matrix F.

SGPN then diverges into three branches that each pass F through a single PointNet layer into:

A Similarity learning branch. This produces a feature matrix F_sim which is used to obtain the similarity matrix
A Confidence learning branch. This produces a feature matrix F_cf which is used to obtain a confidence map
A Semantic segmentation branch. This produces a feature matrix F_sem which is used to obtain the semantic segmentation map
The loss L is given by the sum of the losses from each of these three branches.

Total loss is the sum of the Similarity loss, Confidence loss, and Semantic Segmentation loss
To illustrate the architecture of the model, I’ll be using the 5-point example below as a running example. The points are in the feature matrix F:

Branch 1: Similarity learning branch
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Input
F: Feature vector for every point in the point cloud [Np x Nf]

Process

Pass data through an additional Pointnet layer to obtain similarity feature matrix FSIM [Np x Nf ]. Each point P_i is embedded in the feature space
Create Similarity Matrix S where, for each pair of points {Pi, Pj}, Sij is the L2 distance of the corresponding feature vectors

Output
Similarity matrix S

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Double Hinge Loss for Similarity Matrix

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Since the semantic segmentation branch is wrongly trying to bring pairs of points in the same class together, the α > 1 term is added to increase the weight of the 2nd loss to dominate the gradient from the semantic segmentation output branch. α is set to 2 initially and then increased by 2 every 5 epochs.

K1= 1 and K2= 2 are added to set the ceilings of the respective losses.

Branch 2: Confidence learning branch
This branch produces a confidence map that is used to prune proposals.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Input
F: Feature vector for every point in the pointcloud [Np x Nf ]

Become a Medium member
Process

Pass data through additional Pointnet Layer to obtain Confidence Map CM [Np x 1 ] reflecting the confidence for each proposal/point
Process for learning confidence

Predicted CMi ←from NN
Ground truth CMi = IOU( Si, Gi )
Loss LCF is the L2 loss between the inferred and expected CM
Snippet of code from the Authors below (link here):

Press enter or click to view image in full size

After looking at the code from the authors, I’m a bit sceptical about the learning process as the loss function is very rough. This is because we’re using logical AND and OR functions which can produce very unstable loss scores.

Output
Confidence Map CM. This matrix is used to discard proposals with predicted confidence values less than the Th_C threshold or cardinality less than Th_M2.

In our example below, the proposal generated by point 3 is discarded because it has a low confidence score. This makes intuitive sense as point 3 is somewhat in the centre of all the 5 points and it’s not clear which group it belongs to.

This process of discarding happens in the GroupMerging algorithm, which is talked about in two sections below.

Branch 3: Semantic Segmentation branch
This branch produces a semantic label for each point in the point cloud/

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Input
F: Feature vector for every point in the point cloud [Np x Nf]

Process
I didn’t expand on this section as it is a standard point-wise classifier and is well explained from the paper.

Output
Semantic segmentation matrix M_SEM. The output is an Np × Nc sized matrix where Nc is the number of possible object categories. M_SEM_ij corresponds to the probability that point Pi belongs to class Cj.

GroupMerging Algorithm for pruning proposals:
The similarity Matrix S produces Np proposals, many of which are noisy or represent the same object.

A lot of work is done in pruning the Np proposals generated by the Similarity Matrix S through a process called GroupMerging. I have illustrated some of the things done in this algorithm using the example below.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

GroupMerging Process

Similarity Matrix S converted to the boolean matrix using S < Th_S (0.11)
Proposal 3 eliminated due to C < 0.1 (confidence threshold)
Proposals with less than Th_M2 are dropped
Groups with IOU greater than Th_M1 (0.6) are merged together (Non-Maximum suppression) by selecting a group with bigger Th_M2 (200). Proposal 1 will be merged with proposal 2 and proposal 5 will be merged with proposal 4
If a point belongs to more than one final group proposal, it is randomly assigned to each group (~ 2%). In our example, point ‘3’ is randomly assigned to one of the two proposals
Results
The results from the SGPN process look very promising. They evaluated their models on 3DIS and ShapeNet datasets.

Stanford 3D Indoor Semantic Segmentation Dataset (3DIS)
They validate their results against their own process called Seg-Cluster which is not ideal.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

ShapeNet part segmentation
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Limitations
Because the pairwise similarity matrix grows quadratically as Np increases, it can’t handle many points. At train time, 4096 points are uniformly sampled into blocks of area 1m x 1m. At test time, all points in a 1m x 1m block are used
They validate their results against their own process called Seg-Cluster which is not ideal
Their Confidence Map CM loss function seems very unstable
Their code is hard to read and reimplement
SGPN is a relatively old paper (2017). New approaches from 2020 include 3D-MPA and OccuSeg which have better results
Conclusion
Personally, it was hard for me to get similar results when I tried to replicate the paper. The loss function was very unstable and the model wasn’t able to generalise to a wide range of problems.

Regardless, SGPN was a very interesting paper with its unique representation of the 3D instancing problem as a Similarity Matrix, and the idea of using a separate process to prune and fix the instance proposals that get predicted.

For more information on this paper, have a look below:
https://paperswithcode.com/paper/sgpn-similarity-group-proposal-network-for-3d
